---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/kapitel/30-george-ritzer-the-mc-donaldization-of-society/"}
---
 

“Hello, and welcome to McDonald's, how can I help you?“ - a standard phrase from a standard worker at a standard fast food restaurant. Since its foundation in 1948 by the McDonald brothers and inauguration of the first restaurant by Ray Kroc in 1955 in Illinois [[People/Palina/Sources\|1]], the chain has grown into a ubiquitous phenomenon, satisfying 68 million customers [[People/Palina/Sources\|2]], nearly one percent of the worldwide population, daily, with an impressive efficiency. The key to the success of McDonald's is twofold: recognisable features, planned and standardised for every meal, and automated [[Prozesse - Entwicklungen \|processes]], providing the customer with convenience and stability in their food supplies. Among others, those principles are integrated into George Ritzer's theory of the development of increasingly more sectors of society in the past few decades. In 1993, he coined the concept of “McDonaldization“ in the work he is most acclaimed, yet also most criticised for, “The McDonaldization of Society“.
The following article aims to familiarise the reader with the area of influence process automatisation has in modern, predominantly developed, society. Furthermore, it acquaints the reader with the origins of McDonaldization and draws a comparison between the 20th and 21st century, examining chosen circumstances surrounding the differing ways purpose-based procedures were and are performed.

## 1. Core principles

Generally, Ritzer describes his observation of society, which, specifically regarding social and work-related realities, has a tendency to achieve rationalisation and instrumentalisation. His research corresponds to Max Weber's concept of purpose rationality, implying that modern society acts not only based on traditions or temporary emotions. Rather, it has precise expectations, suitable means at its disposal to live up to those and the capability to calculate and predict consequences. Thus, actions are solely performed because they fulfill a rational and logical purpose. [[People/Palina/Sources\|3]] 
This chapter aims to describe the four fundamental concepts of McDonaldization.

### 1. Efficiency
On one hand, efficiency is the ability to perform a task or operate in a way that minimises resources such as time, money and energy, and especially the waste of those limited resources. At the same time, the quantity, quality and production speed of a given product or service are to be maximised. [[People/Palina/Sources\|4]] If not for the urge to be as efficient as possible in order to have an advantage over concurrence, [[Struktur - Politik - Wirtschaft \|economy]] as we know it today could not exist.
It is undeniably easier for an employee to carry out established, standardised and simple to follow work processes, without spending time thinking about the task sequence and means of execution. Not only does standardisation improve time efficiency, but, due to exactly prescribed, step-by-step mechanisms, a product is developed to be less susceptible to imperfections and defects, thus again saving time in preventable production failure compensation and therefore reducing the production costs. 

### 2. Predictability: calculability and quantifiability
"Grown-ups like numbers."   - Antoine de Saint-Exupéry in _The Little Prince_  [[People/Palina/Sources\|5]]

Analytics departments enable businesses to evaluate different relevant sizes, such as client amount, monthly profit and employee wages. Through long-term observation and comparison, those sizes can be predicted, thus enabling a controlled growth of the business. On the  market place, predictability is indispensable, businesses that seem more stable or predictable are more likely to be invested into, therefore these are more likely to generate profit.
Furthermore, quantification is incorporated in standardisation, where it is emphasised in the assessment of quality, efficiency and business performance by numerical ratings. For instance: "How would you rate our service on a scale from 1 to 10?" In further and more profound customer surveys, the concept of service could be inquired about by extending the term to more relevant components, such as cleanliness in the restaurant, quality of the meal as well as customer friendliness. Thus, a complex, multi-layered phenomenon, such as an overall impression, is broken down into easy to handle questions, the responses of which are easy to process.
In essence, quantifiability can be seen as a beneficial characteristic within McDonaldalised systems, because it offers calculability, which in turn facilitates efficiency, and objectivity, which creates comparability within and between businesses. Moreover, quantifiability is directly tied to predictability and a well-functioning exchange of goods and services.

### 3. Dehumanisation
The constant pursuit of efficiency has led society to develop processes with the least amount of human involvement, either reducing the employees to mindless machines or replacing them with seemingly more intelligent [[Technologie \|technologies]]. The reason for this dehumanisation lies in the objective to minimise human error by introducing rigid and pre-determined routines. Therefore, individual contributions, local traditions and innovations are suppressed for the sake of a recognisable, reproducible and standardised experience.
After disconnecting employees from their job by reducing them to service providers, this focus shift leaves the working place and leaks into personal lives, shapes interpersonal relationships and affects spontaneous, human experiences. 

### 4. Control
Max Weber describes the increasing rationalisation that seems to trap individuals in a society based entirely on purpose-based efficiency and automatisation as a "steel-hard casing of bondage", originally "stahlhartes Gehäuse der Hörigkeit", falsely, yet popularily, known as the "iron cage" [[People/Palina/Sources\|6]] . As already discussed above, individuals in a McDonaldized society loose every aspect of their autonomy and decision-making power, because they are subjected to working days with inflexible schedules, working conditions that often disregard the value of said individuals and expectations that are almost impossible to meet because of strict operation standards.
Because of the highly streamlined, carefully designed McDonaldized system, every interaction seems to predetermined and scripted, depriving both employee and customer of their freedom of speech and choice. Nevertheless, this control could be perceived as an illusion of choice: For example, a customer wishes to personalise their order. This is only possible within a relatively narrow spectrum, because the employee is either not trained (in case of human employees) or not designed (in case of machines) to receive spontaneous requests. The limitations and restrictions only undermine the system and promote compliance.


## 2. Impact on society

The process of McDonaldization has shaped our society since the first days of fast food culture. At first, it was criticised merely for the adverse health effects resulting from the "quantity over quality" mindset. Subsequently, the homogenisation of culture became a topic, since food is undeniably a significant component of every culture, distinguishing different cultural backgrounds. Fast food chains were seen as a threat to local restaurants that offered food full of tradition and culture. On the other hand, McDonald's (as an example for a fast food chain, one could choose almost any other) was and is known for a reliable service, offering a familiar experience, independent of the location or time of day.
McDonaldization is seen remarkably well in the field of education, where it can be found in the form of standardised testing or, more generally, assessment by assignment of a number that in turn corresponds to a knowledge level, and determined curricula. Marks are in fact a subject often addressed and one could think that although they create comparability between students of one class, they are barely ever representative of the student's overall knowledge. It is also plausible that education has developed into a system with some similarities to a conveyor belt, thus students are treated as passive consumers of chosen information instead of active learners interested in exploration and innovation.
In total, whether one speaks of a patient-doctor relationship in the field of healthcare, a school that has the obligation to educate their students or a local retail store that has difficulty developing next to fast food chain restaurant, the impact of McDonaldization is considerable: the removal of humans, something familiar, surely something all cultures share, and the implementation of rational [[Begriffe/geistige Werte\|values]] such as efficiency has eroded such crucial concepts like [[Begriffe/Identität\|identity]], connections and cultural diversity.

## 3. Latest developments

Above, it was described how McDonaldization has been shaping predominantly developed societies in the past. These processes are still incorporated nowadays, however, the latest technological developments also play an indisputable role.
A mentionable phenomenon are the algorithms prevalent on nearly every social media platform and search browser. An algorithm is a learning mechanism: based on experience from past search entries, it proposes similar content to the user, thus saving them time searching for this content. As mentioned earlier, this can be seen as an occasion where a choice is possible, but not probable, since that would require more effort.
Artificial intelligence, specifically chatbots, simplify and accelerate the obtainment of information with an impressive profundity. However, this supports dehumanisation even further, there seems to be no reason left to ask a human expert in one specific field if one can ask the digital expert in all fields.


## 4. Conclusion

Originating in a cramped kitchen, McDonaldization is a culture phenomenon that reaches deep into developed societies, shaping nearly every aspect of our everyday lives by gradually adapting our values. Although there are undeniable advantages like outstanding efficiency, attracting familiarity and simplicity, McDonaldization often excludes the fundament of all societies: humans, their interactions, their spontaneity and their culture.